---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "DVC + Many Files: A Strategy for Efficient Large Dataset Management"
excerpt: "Unaware that DVC struggles with large datasets? It was also a surprise for us."
date: 2024-06-30
category: "mlops"
tags: machine-learning, dvc
---

Implementing DVC at my workplace had been successful for most tasks, but dealing with a dataset containing 1 million images was tough. Uploading and downloading the dataset took several hours, so we had to use some clever tricks to streamline the workflow. In this post, I’ll share the valuable lessons we learned to help you avoid similar pitfalls.

## Context ##

In an effort to improve data management during experiments, I decided to incorporate DVC. DVC (Data Version Control) is a tool that stores your data in remote storage and versions it using GIT. It hashes the data and saves the hash along with other metadata in source control (similar to using pointers in C). The actual data is then transferred to a corresponding folder in the remote storage.

At first, everything worked smoothly. We could upload and download data without any issues. It was easy to track which version of our code was using which version of the data for running our experiments. However, things got complicated when we tried to work with datasets containing around 1 million images.

It turns out that DVC struggles with handling a large number of files (>200K). In our case, it took over 8 hours to upload the data with DVC and another 3 hours to download it. These times were clearly unmanageable for us. Once the download was complete, DVC needed an additional ~1.5 hours to check out the files. The conclusion was clear: we had a huge performance issue!

## Problem ##

DVC has to check every file to make sure it’s the right one and avoid uploading the same file twice. This computation takes time and could be inefficiently programmed. On top of the overhead per request, there’s another problem that we ran into. It costs a lot of money to fire 1 million requests against the storage account. So, we had to come up with a solution to make DVC work for us.

## Solution ##

The solution we decided to implement was to zip the images in several archives. That way, we could reduce the number of files DVC had to check. The easiest way to do this was to use the `zip` command in Linux. We created a script that zipped the images in groups and uploaded them to the remote storage. This way, we reduced the number of files DVC had to check from 1 million to ~1000. This change significantly improved the upload and download times. 

Here is the script we used to zip the images:

```
#!/bin/bash

directory_path="imagenet"

# The directory structure should be as follows:
# imagenet/
# ├── n01440764
# │   ├── n01440764_10026.JPEG
# │   ├── n01440764_10027.JPEG
# │   ........
# ├── n01440765
# │   ├── n01440765_1000.JPEG
# │   ........
# .........

#!/bin/bash

directory_path="dataset"
max_processes=16

# Function to handle ZIP operation using parallel
zip_directories() {
    find "$directory_path" -mindepth 1 -maxdepth 1 -type d | \
    parallel --progress -j $max_processes 'zip -qr {}.zip {} && rm -rf {}'
}

# Function to handle UNZIP operation using parallel
unzip_files() {
    find "$directory_path" -type f -name "*.zip" | \
    parallel --progress -j $max_processes 'unzip -q {} && rm {}'
}

# Main script logic
if [ $# -ne 1 ]; then
    echo "Usage: $0 [ZIP|UNZIP]"
    exit 1
fi

action=$1

case $action in
    ZIP)
        zip_directories
        ;;
    UNZIP)
        unzip_files
        ;;
    *)
        echo "Error: Unrecognized option '$action'. Usage: $0 [ZIP|UNZIP]"
        exit 1
        ;;
esac

exit 0
```

This solution has some points to consider:
* I strongly recommend grouping the files in a way that makes sense for your project. In our case, we use some metadata (eg. labeling session) that naturally create a partition on the dataset. This way, we could easily navigate through the dataset and find the images we needed.
* Adding new data to the dataset should not modify the existing archives. This way, DVC will not store the same files twice. The new data should be added to a new archive. This is easy to achieve based on the metadata used to partition the dataset.

Another solution was proposed at [this article](https://fizzylogic.nl/2023/01/13/did-you-know-dvc-doesn-t-handle-large-datasets-neither-did-we-and-here-s-how-we-fixed-it), which uses `Parquet` for partitioning the data instead of zipping it. This clever solution is more efficient for some cases, but it requires more effort to implement.

## Summary ##

DVC is a great tool for managing data in machine learning projects. However, it struggles with large datasets containing a large number of files. To overcome this limitation, we zipped the images in groups and uploaded them to the remote storage. This change significantly improved the upload and download times. I hope this post helps you avoid similar pitfalls when working with large datasets in DVC. If you have any questions or suggestions, feel free to leave a comment below. I’d love to hear from you!
